[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Good morning, first of all.
>> Good morning.
>> And thank you so much for
sitting down with me all three
of you.
>> You're welcome.
Good to be here.
>> It occurs to me as I sit
here looking at the three of you
that one of the things that
you have in common, well,
check me out on this.
See if I'm right.
Do all of you come from
parents who meditate?
>> Yeah.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah, I think we all
come from parents who have
addictions to certain things,
and one of them is meditation.
>> That's such a
wonderful addiction.
Isn't it?
>> Yeah.
>> What was the example that
was set for you, I'm wondering.
And how did it affect
you in your lives?
Let's start with you, Gotham.
>> Let me start by saying, I
started meditating when I was
five years old.
And it was a simple technique.
And it was probably
nothing more than staying
quiet for five minutes
at a time, which
was quite an achievement
for a five-year-old.
And the reason I wanted to
start is because my parents
were doing it.
My sister was doing it.
And they led by example because
I wanted to be part of the fun.
It seemed like I
was being left out.
So that's when I started.
And then I learned a more
traditional technique
when I was about 12 years old.
And for me, I mean, I could
detect from a very young age
in my parents and
then later in myself
that there was some
sense of silence.
Even in the midst
of everything else,
as long as I was
meditating consistently,
I felt some anchored in
some sense of silence.
So that was the greatest
example of meditation
that my parents set for me.
>> Noah, what about you?
>> The one example that
sticks out in my mind is,
although there was lots
of meditation practice,
spiritual practice
going on around,
was never really
imposed or offered.
My father didn't train me to
meditate as a young person.
But certainly, those seeds
were sown in my consciousness
just from being around it.
One example is I can remember
burning myself pretty
bad on a heater when I was
about four or five years old,
about that same age.
And my instant reaction, I
think people's instant reaction
is to tighten and maybe
get angry at the pain,
out of the fear.
And my father's
instruction was to really
soften to it, to send
love to the pain,
to send softness
into the sensation,
and to watch the
sensation moment to moment
as it passes, rather than
just screaming and sending
the hatred into, damn you,
my body that hurt so badly.
And so then throughout my
life, I had that conditioning
of when I stubbed my toe,
rather than my instant reaction
might be to tighten and
to send anger to it,
but then to also remember
how softening dissipates
the pain much more quickly.
So things like that that weren't
like, this is meditation,
but certainly that came out
of the meditative tradition.
>> Ocean.
>> Well, my mom and dad
meditated many hours a day
in my early years.
I was born on a little
island off the coast
of British Columbia, Canada
in a one room log cabin
three miles from the
nearest neighbor.
And I grew up poor
economically, but feeling rich
because I had beautiful
forest to enjoy.
I had clean water and clean air.
I had time with my mom and dad.
And they were in a very
deep meditative space.
They grew almost
all their own food.
They lived on less
than $500 a year.
And their whole life revolved
around meditation and yoga
and spiritual practice and
connection with the earth.
And as I was a little older, we
wound up moving to California.
And I came to see
that not everyone had
the kind of opportunities
that I had as a youngster.
And so then my
focus in life became
working to see to it that
everyone could have things
like time with their mom and
dad and a safe environment
to live in and forests to enjoy
because I felt that everyone
deserved those things.
And it didn't feel
right that I should
have those kinds of privileges
where other people grew up
with gangs and concrete
for their environment.
And so my whole life really
has revolved since then
around service and working
to make this world a better
place for everybody.
>> How different do you suppose
the world would be today
environmentally, politically,
financially, I guess, too,
so many ways, if we all
meditated very early
on in our lives?
Look at the smile that
comes across Noah's face.
How different would it be?
>> Very.
I mean, I can't say, you know?
>> You can speculate.
>> Well, I don't even feel
like I could speculate.
But I feel like it'd be
much different if we all
learned to encourage kindness,
encourage compassion and love
and self forgiveness and
forgiveness of others
from a young age, rather
than what we really
seem to be purging is
punishment and lots of judgment
and lots of anger and fear is
what it seems to be constantly
barraging us from all angles.
A lot of parenting is based on
those principles of punishment.
And so I think it would
probably be very different.
I mean, if you look at other
cultures that have meditative,
if you look at Tibetans
or some of the people
who have grown up with this
meditative environment,
their culture is much
different than American society
and culture, much more peaceful.
>> Another thing that
comes to my mind,
as I look at the three of
you, are the words spiritual
heritage, because you all come
from extraordinary spiritual
heritage.
Do you feel a sense
of responsibility,
and I think in the very
best sense of the word,
but do you feel, are you
aware of a responsibility
to carry it on?
Start with you, Gotham.
>> I think in a certain respect.
But I have to admit
something fairly selfish.
In terms of things that
I do, I do it mostly
because I really enjoy it.
And I derive a great sense
of fulfillment for it.
And I think that's the best
example that I can send,
the best example I can carry on
from the work my dad has done.
Because I can tell just from
hanging out with him still
that everything he does, whether
it's a book or a music project
or whatever, he's just
enjoying it so much.
And that's another lesson
I've learned from him.
And hopefully, I think
by bring that energy,
I might be able to
encourage other people
and be a model for other people.
And I think that's some of the
work we're all involved in,
which is setting
examples for young people
to express themselves
in whichever way
it is, not in any
specific way, but to help
empower them to feel
like their voices matter
and what they want
to do is important.
>> Noah.
>> I definitely feel a sense of
indebtedness to the wonderful
tools that I've been given
that have transformed my life
in so many really practical
ways that I really want to share
that with others.
And specifically, I
really want to share that
with my generation
and the subculture
that I've grown up in.
It's really easy
for me now, I spend
a lot of my time in
meditation centers
and all of these wonderful,
loving, spiritual circles,
to forget about all of my
friends who have grown up
on the streets and have grown up
in really difficult situations,
where I spent a lot
of my early life.
But I really feel
an indebtedness
to share the Dharma
practice with my peers.
Which, for me, are a lot
of underprivileged kids
that have found
themselves into punk rock
scenes and the tattoo scenes
and to hip hop culture
into '90s subculture, and
where spirituality is greatly
lacking.
You know, is greatly lacking.
And so rather than me
taking my life experience
and going and
spending all my time
with middle aged people, who
I do spend a lot of my time
with at the meditation centers,
to really bring it back
onto the streets and back
into the cabs and stuff where
my generation is.
>> Right.
>> And so I definitely do, not
so much to pay anybody back
or anything, but just that I
feel clearly that's the best
use of my life's energy.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
And it manifests all over,
by the way, all over,
not just in the cities
that you're working in.
What about you, Ocean?
What does your spiritual
heritage responsibility
give you?
>> I feel a profound sense
of gratitude for the example
my parents have set.
And I look at what they
came from in their lives
and the challenges
they grew up with
and how hard they had to
struggle to try and have
some sense of who they were in a
culture and an environment that
was constantly telling them
to try to be someone else.
>> Yes.
>> And I think that so many of
us are surrounded by messages
that don't affirm our souls and
our integrity and who we are,
models that we don't
want to follow.
And I am so grateful that I have
their example to learn from.
Not that I'm the same person.
I'm a unique individual
with my own path
and my own destiny, my own
dreams, and my own prayers.
But I pick up where they left
off, or where they leave off,
or where they've gotten
to in their lives so far.
And that's a starting
place for me.
And it's such a boost
to start from a place
where I have the benefit of a
whole lifetime of questioning
and learning and growing
and seeking to build on.
>> Noah, you said something
interesting that I'd like
to hear all three of
you guys talk about.
You used the term
just practical advice.
Because there is still a
huge part of our society
who looks at me, the
person who grew up
in the '60s, wanting
to change the world,
looks at you growing up in the
'90s, almost out of the '90s,
wanting to change the world.
And they think we're just
those woo woo people.
They think we're just sort
of those do-gooder people.
I think it's time to talk
about practical advice.
And I love that
you have a concept
of putting practical
advice out there
in the world for
people your age.
So let's talk about that.
What is some of that advice?
>> I mean, it's just really
so basically just comes down
to like, what's life about?
What's human?
>> But that's what I
want to hear about.
>> Like what's the point?
Like why are we here?
What's the point?
I thought it's really clear.
It's like it's about happiness.
>> Yes.
>> Right?
And it's everybody.
Universally, we all
want to be happy.
>> Yeah.
>> And so how do
we find happiness?
I mean, do we find
happiness in judgment,
or do we find happiness
in forgiveness?
And do we find
happiness in anger,
or do we find happiness in love?
You know?
So I mean, it's practical.
It's really basic.
It's not woo woo.
It's not anything.
It's just what is.
>> Yes.
Yeah.
>> And it's just about utilizing
practices that encourage love,
that encourage forgiveness,
that encourage awakening,
whatever you want to
call it, consciousness,
awareness of who we are
and what we're doing here.
And that, yeah, we
all want happiness.
And some of us think
that we're going
to find happiness by beating
each other, by revenge,
by those things.
Just switching that
and seeing clearly
that that never has brought
happiness to anybody
and it never will, and that
will bring happiness to you
is forgiving yourself
and forgiving that person
and learning to love
better and learning
to be more peaceful and happy.
And so yeah, it's
very practical.
And I think it's almost silly
to even call it practical.
It's just it's
such common sense.
But for some reason, we've
gotten so far away from that,
that now it seems woo woo or
seems like some hippie ideal
to be happy, to be peaceful.
>> Do you see the importance
of talking about it, though?
>> Of course.
>> There are people, I
believe, who are hungry
for the knowledge.
And though it is just
practical and basic,
I think it's important to
still put it out there and say,
this is how you begin.
There's a huge wave of
spirituality crossing America
in terms of health and
the environment, Ocean,
what practical advice
do you put out there?
>> Well, a lot of people
feel overwhelmed by the state
of our world today.
And a lot of people feel
like their only options
are to be lost in despair or
to go numb and push it away.
I think we have a third option,
which is far more appealing.
And that's to seek to
find a positive response.
I think that we can hear
the problems around us
as a call to a place
inside us that says, hey,
I'm not going to just stand
by and let this go on.
I'm going to do
something about it.
The bigger the
problems are, the more
needed we are in this world.
>> Example.
>> And for example, we can
eat lower on the food chain.
It takes 16 pounds of grain
to produce one pound of beef
in this country.
So if we eat one
less pound of beef,
we are essentially
enabling 15 people
to eat with the
food that's saved.
We can choose to recycle.
Recycling one aluminum can
saves enough energy to power
a car on the freeway
for two miles.
>> Does it really?
>> If the car gets 40
miles per gallon, yeah.
>> Wow.
That's astonishing.
>> There are huge numbers
of things we can do.
And we've just got to
start thinking about it.
Every dollar we spend is a vote.
And we're voting for the
company that made the product,
and we're voting for
the way they made it.
So do we want to support
child labor in China?
Do we want to support pesticide
deaths on the grape fields
of California?
Do we want to go organic?
Do we want to buy
from local companies?
Do we want to choose
to make our dollars
into a vote for the kind
of world we want to create?
I personally do.
>> You have me very
enrolled, Ocean.
Mr. Chopra, your personal,
practical advice?
>> You know, I think the
most practical application,
we talk about street
spirituality, I guess,
our generation.
>> Yes.
>> The most practical
application is, one,
to start asking the
appropriate questions.
And for young people, those are
the most fundamental things.
Why am I here?
What do I believe in?
And two, things that we can do
is the willingness to listen,
because that's the
biggest problem, I think,
is that there's
not this space yet
where young people feel secure
and safe to ask those questions
and have people listen to them.
And I think that's some
of the work we're doing
is trying to create
that space and trying
to create that vocabulary,
one, where young people can
start to talk about their
spirituality and articulate it.
But also showing the willingness
to listen and not judge.
Because sometimes, when
you ask those questions,
you come up with
some wild responses,
especially from young people.
But they don't
need to be judged.
They need to be heard.
>> Yeah, very well said.
The gift of listening
is vital in our world
today, especially
to your generation.
Are you optimistic
about the future?
>> You know, you picked
the right group to ask that
question.
Because, yeah, I think we
face tremendous challenges.
And those challenges
can be intimidating
when you look at the scale
of some of the things
that we have to resolve.
But at least amongst
this group, I've
got the feeling that
there's a willingness
to take small steps,
because, ultimately, that's
where you have to start.
And I'm very optimistic.
I mean, I know, again,
I'm excited by everything
I'm doing.
And I'm excited to go
and interact with people
and to go to schools
and meet young people,
because the assumption,
a lot of times,
is that young people
don't care, that they're
distracted by other things.
But we've found that's not
true, that if you engage
young people at a very
honest and raw level,
they'll give you the
most incredible responses
and they'll show you new ways to
really create a better future.
>> Yeah.
>> What about your
optimism, Ocean?
>> Well, my level of optimism
about what I see going on out
there fluctuates every day.
Some days, I think, oh, yes,
things are turning around.
It's going to be great.
Sometimes I think, oh, no,
this world is totally doomed.
But I don't think
that that's where
we need to source in for our
strength and our courage.
>> No?
>> I think we need to source
in the hopes and the dreams
and the prayers
that live inside us.
They're eternal.
>> Yes.
>> They never go away
unless we snuff them out.
And as long as we are
breathing and we are praying
and we are dreaming
of a better way,
we can have optimism,
if we choose to.
>> Thank you for that reminder.
What about you, Noah?
What are your thoughts
for your children?
>> Well, I don't currently
have any children.
>> Well, your children
of the future.
>> As far of the future, I mean,
part of me really feels like
what's really
important is right now.
I'm not even so sure
that the future exists.
The present moment is really
what we have and is really
where we can do our work.
Certainly, all of the work
that we're doing in the present
will affect what will come,
if and when that comes.
I have a great
amount of optimism
and really deep understanding
that personal freedom is
possible and is
happening for people.
Out of my own experience,
the vast array of
experiences of suffering
and of happiness and joy
that I've had in this one
short incarnation thus far,
that that will
probably continue.
But I don't feel
real comfortable
speculating on what the
future is going to be.
I have a real faith that no
matter what it is, it'll be OK.
>> What do the three of you say
to probably the largest group
of people existing in
American society today,
and that's the baby boomers,
those of us who were you
in the 60s, those of
us who were activists,
those of us who marched in
Berkeley and Washington?
I was one of those people.
What do you say to that
group of people today?
What do you say to us?
>> I want to say, thank you
for giving us the opportunity
and giving us the upbringing to
feel empowered and comfortable
with the things that
we want to talk about.
We're very grateful,
not only to our parents,
but to their
generation at large.
So that's one thing.
And the other
thing is the dream,
I guess, is still alive,
and that some people may
have forgotten
that, may have got
caught up in the drama that
is jobs and relationships
and schools and
everything like that.
But there's still
a lot of hope left.
And we welcome them back,
if that's what it takes.
But it's exciting.
And I think it's not just
that we can make a change,
but that we are together
making a change.
And it's cool to
be a part of that.
And we're excited, whether it's
the baby boomers or Generation
Y or whoever, to jump
on the bandwagon,
because it's a fun ride.
>> Yeah.
Noah, know your message to us?
>> I really like that.
I think that gratitude
for having brought
all of these wonderful
spiritual traditions to us,
all of this wonderful
political activism,
and the changes that
took place in the world
due to the activism of
that generation, beautiful.
And just I would like to ask
you to please continue, not
to forget about it, not to
become jaded or feel like that
was something you did
while you were in college,
and now, you're stuck in your
household or raising a family
and that there's
not much you can do.
Personally, I feel like
the most that we can all do
is really to focus
deeply on ourselves,
to really focus deeply on
our own spiritual practice,
on our own awakening, on our
own happiness, and just to ask,
can we all just try
to wake up ourselves?
The biggest, greatest
service we can
do for all beings everywhere,
I think, is our own awakening,
is our own greater sense
of peace and happiness
in our lives.
So if people would
just continue that,
continue that work
on themselves.
And to that, I send out a plea.
>> Thank you.
Ocean.
>> I think a lot of people in
your generation have gotten
so caught up on thinking, oh,
I've got to save myself before
I can save the world.
And maybe in the '60s, there was
this breakthrough of activism.
And then there was a
shift towards self focus
in terms of both spiritual
growth and also economic focus.
And I think that
what I would say
is, you don't have to
save yourself first.
I think it needs to
be a joint process.
We work on ourselves.
We work on the world.
We bring peace to ourselves.
We bring peace to the world.
And I think that spirituality
that is focused internally
and doesn't have a response
to the pain and the cries
of the children dying and
the pain of our cities
and the pain of our
times is pretty empty.
And I think that
it will not truly
have the depth or the meaning
that it can until we respond
to what's going on around us.
I would also say, look at
the gap between the rich
and the poor in this country.
This country is becoming
a virtual symbol
around the world of greed
at the expense of the poor.
And I think that we can
do better than that.
And I think that those
in your generation that
have achieved a certain
level of success,
now need, for their
own well-being,
to look, OK, before I die,
what is my contribution going
to be to this world?
When I pass over
to the other side,
do I want to say, oh, I
did a great job making
enough money to
have a nice house
and I gave up on all my ideals?
I don't think so.
>> I thank you for your passion.
I thank you for your commitment.
And I thank you for
reigniting the fire
in a lot of people's
hearts, because that
takes a powerful,
powerful group of people.
And each one of you individually
are extraordinary human beings.
You humble me.
You really do.
Thank you for this conversation.
>> Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]